[docs] Scala in Gitpod (#527)
gitpod-io/website: src/docs/languages/scala.md

# Scala in Gitpod

> Welcome, Scala programmer, Today we will show you how to set up your project for Gitpod.

Reviewer: Either `programmer. Today` or `programmer, today`. Please pick one. 🙂

Reviewer: Also, I think users are interested in adapting Gitpod to their project, not adapting their project to Gitpod.

```suggestion
Welcome, Scala programmer. Today we will show you how to configure Gitpod for your project.
```

## Installing Scala

First, you'll probably want to install Scala. To do this, add a new file to your repository called [.gitpod.Dockerfile](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-docker/), and add the following content to it:

```Dockerfile
FROM gitpod/workspace-full

RUN brew install scala
```

Additionally create a file called [.gitpod.yml](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-gitpod-file/) and add the following:

```YAML
image:
  file: .gitpod.Dockerfile
```

Now commit both files into source control.

### What are these files for?

> > If you understand the snippet you may safely ignore the following 2 paragraphs

Reviewer: "the snippet" is ambiguous here: What snippet do you mean? (Maybe clarify with "the two snippets above", or remove this comment entirely, since people who know will have already skipped at "What are these files for?")

Author: Done!

> Let's break this down. First, we declare `FROM gitpod/workspace-full` to have your project use Gitpod's default workspace image (recommended). You can use other images too, but some of the following might not work with other base images.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's break this down. First, in `.gitpod.Dockerfile`, we declare `FROM gitpod/workspace-full` to have your project use Gitpod's default workspace image (recommended). You can use other images too, but some Gitpod features might not work as well with untested images.
```

> Next, we declare `RUN brew install scala` this simply tells brew to install Scala into the workspace image via HomeBrew.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we declare `RUN brew install scala`. This simply installs Scala into the workspace image via HomeBrew.
```

> Finally, please note that these changes will only take effect for new Gitpod workspaces. To try them out, you'll have to commit both files; push them to GitHub, and then open a new Gitpod workspace for your repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, please note that these changes will only take effect when you create new Gitpod workspaces. To try out your new automated dev setup, simply commit both files; push them to GitHub; and then open a new Gitpod workspace for your repository.
```

## Using the Ammonite REPL

![The Ammonite REPL in action](../images/AmmoniteRepl.png)

> To install the Ammonite REPL in Gitpod you must add the following to our previously created [.gitpod.Dockerfile](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-docker/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To install the Ammonite REPL in Gitpod you must add the following to our previously-created [.gitpod.Dockerfile](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-docker/)
```

```Dockerfile
RUN sudo sh -c '(echo "#!/usr/bin/env sh" && curl -L https://github.com/lihaoyi/Ammonite/releases/download/2.0.4/2.13-2.0.4) > /usr/local/bin/amm && chmod +x /usr/local/bin/amm'
```

Then commit the changes to your repository. Finally, when you open a new workspace, you will be able to type `amm` in the terminal, and behold a super cool Scala REPL in your workspace!

## Building projects with sbt

> To use the `sbt` (simple build tool) in Gitpod, you can add the following to that [.gitpod.Dockerfile](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-docker/) we created:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use `sbt` (simple build tool) in Gitpod, you can add the following to that [.gitpod.Dockerfile](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-docker/) we created:
```

```Dockerfile
RUN brew install sbt
```

As usual, commit and push the changes, and `sbt` will be installed in all future workspaces.

## Managing Scala versions with scalaenv

Say your project needs a specific Scala version. You can use `scalaenv`, a version manager for Scala, to switch between different Scala versions. But first, we must install `scalaenv`: As usual, we need to change our [.gitpod.Dockerfile](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-docker/), by adding this to it:

```Dockerfile
RUN brew install scalaenv
```

> Then, say you need Scala version `2.9.3`, you would add the following to your [.gitpod.Dockerfile](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-docker/):

Reviewer: Repeating is cool and helpful, but maybe here it's not really necessary:

```suggestion
Then, say you need Scala version `2.9.3`, you would add the following line as well:
```

```Dockerfile
RUN scalaenv install scala-2.9.3 && scalaenv global scala-2.9.3
```

> ## Using coursier an artifact fetcher for Scala

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Using coursier, an artifact fetcher for Scala
```

`coursier` is useful for building certain Scala projects and installing different tools.

```Dockerfile
RUN brew install coursier/formulas/coursier
```

> (Don't forget to commit and push the changes!)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(Don't forget to commit and push this change!)
```

## Formatting Scala code with scalafmt

> To install `scalafmt` for your repository please add the following to your [.gitpod.Dockerfile](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-docker/):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To install `scalafmt` for your repository, add the following to your [.gitpod.Dockerfile](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-docker/):
```

```Dockerfile
RUN sudo env "PATH=$PATH" coursier bootstrap org.scalameta:scalafmt-cli_2.12:2.4.2 \
  -r sonatype:snapshots \
  -o /usr/local/bin/scalafmt --standalone --main org.scalafmt.cli.Cli
```

Then to format your code simply run `scalafmt`!

## Putting it all together

> A full example of a [.gitpod.Dockerfile](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-docker/) configured for Scala could look something like:

Reviewer: It's nice to recap the full `.gitpod.Dockerfile`, but I think you should also remind readers of the `.gitpod.yml`, just in case they didn't read the first section.

Author: Done!

```Dockerfile
FROM gitpod/workspace-full

USER gitpod

> RUN sudo sh -c '(echo "#!/usr/bin/env sh" && curl -L https://github.com/lihaoyi/Ammonite/releases/download/2.0.4/2.13-2.0.4) > /usr/local/bin/amm && chmod +x /usr/local/bin/amm'

Reviewer: I don't think you've mentioned `USER gitpod` before, so this is surprising. Also it's not useful, so let's remove it.

```suggestion
FROM gitpod/workspace-full

RUN sudo sh -c '(echo "#!/usr/bin/env sh" && curl -L https://github.com/lihaoyi/Ammonite/releases/download/2.0.4/2.13-2.0.4) > /usr/local/bin/amm && chmod +x /usr/local/bin/amm'
```

RUN brew install scala coursier/formulas/coursier sbt scalaenv

RUN sudo env "PATH=$PATH" coursier bootstrap org.scalameta:scalafmt-cli_2.12:2.4.2 \
  -r sonatype:snapshots \
  -o /usr/local/bin/scalafmt --standalone --main org.scalafmt.cli.Cli

RUN scalaenv install scala-2.9.3 && scalaenv global scala-2.9.3
```

> You will notice all the `brew install` commands are on the same line. We recommend grouping similar commands together to minimize the number of [Docker layers](https://docs.docker.com/develop/develop-images/dockerfile_best-practices/#minimize-the-number-of-layers).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will notice that all the `brew install` commands are on the same line. We recommend grouping similar commands together to minimize the number of [Docker layers](https://docs.docker.com/develop/develop-images/dockerfile_best-practices/#minimize-the-number-of-layers).
```

## VSCode Extensions

### Scala Syntax (official)

![Scala Syntax demo](../images/scala-syntax.png)

Scala Syntax adds basic syntax highlighting for Scala and `sbt` files. To get it, add the following to your [.gitpod.yml](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-gitpod-file/) file:

```YAML
vscode:
  extensions:
    - scala-lang.scala@0.3.9:kklqw+c/dNRmtTU8B5repw==
```

### Metals

![An example of the metals in Gitpod](../images/metals-demo.png)

> Metals adds amazing Scala support for Gitpod advanced autocompletion and debugging support just to name a few. Although to use it you must also use the previously mentioned Scala Syntax you should do the following

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a comma between Gitpod and advanced.
Also maybe add "are" after "autocompletion and debugging support".

Please feel free to keep it as it is if it's grammatically correct. I'm not good at English and don't know grammar well :slightly_smiling_face:

Author: No, Grammarly says its OK

Reviewer: > Metals adds amazing Scala support for Gitpod advanced autocompletion and debugging support just to name a few.

I agree that this sentence is really hard to understand.

Maybe:

> Metals adds helpful Scala features to Gitpod, like for example advanced autocompletion and debugging support just to name a few.

Author: OK

Author: what about
Metals adds helpful Scala features to Gitpod, for example, advanced autocompletion and debugging support just to name a few.

Author: Done!

If you already added Scala Syntax put the following on the following line

```YAML
    - scalameta.metals@1.7.8:oixMSF1r3cXQPfOQ34+sTA==
```

Otherwise, add the following to your [.gitpod.yml](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-gitpod-file/)

```YAML
vscode:
  extensions:
    - scala-lang.scala@0.3.9:kklqw+c/dNRmtTU8B5repw==
    - scalameta.metals@1.7.8:oixMSF1r3cXQPfOQ34+sTA==
```

Either way, the end result should look like the snippet above.

> Boom! You're done! (Just a reminder don't forget to commit the changes)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Boom! You're done! (Just a reminder, don't forget to commit the changes.)
```

## Debugging Scala code

> To debug Scala code in Gitpod you must use the metals extension which we just went over here is an example of Scala Debugging in action

Reviewer: Punctuation is great. And it's free. You can use it as much as you want. 😄

```suggestion
To debug Scala code in Gitpod you must use the metals extension which we just went over. Here is an example of Scala Debugging in action:
```

Author: Sorry, I write as I think, which tends to be just a never-ending stream

![Example of debugging Scala in Gitpod](../images/scala-debug.gif)

> In general when debugging scala code go to the main method and click the debug button over it! And boom you're debugging

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general when debugging Scala code, go to the main method, and click the Debug button over it! And boom you're debugging
```

## Try it!

To see a minimal example repository with a Gitpod configuration that installs all the tools we've covered, see [gitpod-io/Gitpod-Scala](https://github.com/gitpod-io/Gitpod-Scala). You can also try it in your browser:

[![Open in Gitpod](https://gitpod.io/button/open-in-gitpod.svg)](https://gitpod.io/#https://github.com/gitpod-io/Gitpod-Scala)

## Need help?

If you are having trouble and need help please [file an issue on GitHub](https://github.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/issues/new/choose), or, find us in the [Gitpod community](https://community.gitpod.io/)

## Feedback

> We love feedback and want to continue to improve on all of our guides and documentation. Whether you found a grammar mistake, or we left out your favorite Scala tool, or just have general feedback on the guide, please [file an issue on GitHub](https://github.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/issues/new/choose), or, find us in the [Gitpod community](https://community.gitpod.io/)!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We love feedback and want to continue to improve on all of our guides and documentation. Whether you found a grammar mistake, or we left out your favorite Scala tool, or you just have general feedback on the guide, please [file an issue on GitHub](https://github.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/issues/new/choose), or, find us in the [Gitpod community](https://community.gitpod.io/)!
```

Reviewer: You're repeating exactly the same two links as just above.

Maybe only mention them once in such close proximity?

```Dockerfile
FROM gitpod/workspace-full

RUN brew install scala
```

Additionally create a file called [.gitpod.yml](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-gitpod-file/) and add the following:

```YAML
image:
  file: .gitpod.Dockerfile
```

Now commit both files into source control.

### What are these files for?

Let's break this down. First, in `.gitpod.Dockerfile`, we declare `FROM gitpod/workspace-full` to have your project use Gitpod's default workspace image (recommended). You can use other images too, but some Gitpod features might not work as well with untested images.

Next, we declare `RUN brew install scala`. This simply installs Scala into the workspace image via HomeBrew.

Then, we register our custom Dockerfile in Gitpod's configuration file `.gitpod.yml`, so that Gitpod knows it should pick it up and build it on-the-fly when booting up new workspaces.

Finally, please note that these changes will only take effect in new workspaces. To try out your new automated dev setup, simply commit both files; push them to GitHub; and then open a new Gitpod workspace for your repository.

> 🚀

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, please note that these changes will only take effect in new workspaces. To try out your new automated dev setup, simply commit both files; push them to GitHub; and then open a new Gitpod workspace for your repository. 🚀
```

![The Ammonite REPL in action](../images/AmmoniteRepl.png)

> To install the Ammonite REPL in Gitpod you must add the following to our previously-created [.gitpod.Dockerfile](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-docker/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To install the [Ammonite REPL](https://ammonite.io/) in Gitpod, you must add the following to our previously-created [.gitpod.Dockerfile](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-docker/):
```

```Dockerfile
RUN sudo sh -c '(echo "#!/usr/bin/env sh" && curl -L https://github.com/lihaoyi/Ammonite/releases/download/2.0.4/2.13-2.0.4) > /usr/local/bin/amm && chmod +x /usr/local/bin/amm'
```

> Then commit the changes to your repository. Finally, when you open a new workspace, you will be able to type `amm` in the terminal, and behold a super cool Scala REPL in your workspace!

Reviewer: It's not enough to just commit the changes (if the commits are local, any new Gitpod workspace will still get the old setup). I suggest to add the word "push" as well:

```suggestion
Then commit the changes and push to your repository. Finally, when you open a new workspace, you will be able to type `amm` in the terminal, and behold a super cool Scala REPL in your workspace!
```

## Building projects with sbt

> To use `sbt` (simple build tool) in Gitpod, you can add the following to that [.gitpod.Dockerfile](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-docker/) we created:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use [sbt](https://www.scala-sbt.org/) (simple build tool) in Gitpod, you can add the following to that [.gitpod.Dockerfile](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-docker/) we created:
```

```Dockerfile
RUN brew install sbt
```

As usual, commit and push the changes, and `sbt` will be installed in all future workspaces.

## Managing Scala versions with scalaenv

> Say your project needs a specific Scala version. You can use `scalaenv`, a version manager for Scala, to switch between different Scala versions. But first, we must install `scalaenv`: As usual, we need to change our [.gitpod.Dockerfile](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-docker/), by adding this to it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Say your project needs a specific Scala version. You can use [scalaenv](https://github.com/scalaenv/scalaenv), a version manager for Scala, to switch between different Scala versions. But first, we must install `scalaenv`. As usual, we need to change our [.gitpod.Dockerfile](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-docker/), by adding this to it:
```

```Dockerfile
RUN brew install scalaenv
```

Then, say you need Scala version `2.9.3`, you would add the following line as well:

```Dockerfile
RUN scalaenv install scala-2.9.3 && scalaenv global scala-2.9.3
```

## Using coursier, an artifact fetcher for Scala

> `coursier` is useful for building certain Scala projects and installing different tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[coursier](https://get-coursier.io/) is useful for building certain Scala projects and installing different tools.
```

```Dockerfile
RUN brew install coursier/formulas/coursier
```

(Don't forget to commit and push this change!)

## Formatting Scala code with scalafmt

> To install `scalafmt` for your repository, add the following to your [.gitpod.Dockerfile](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-docker/):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To install [scalafmt](https://scalameta.org/scalafmt/) for your repository, add the following to your [.gitpod.Dockerfile](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-docker/):
```

  -r sonatype:snapshots \
  -o /usr/local/bin/scalafmt --standalone --main org.scalafmt.cli.Cli
```

Then to format your code simply run `scalafmt`!

## Putting it all together

A full example of a [.gitpod.Dockerfile](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-docker/) configured for Scala could look something like:

```Dockerfile
FROM gitpod/workspace-full

RUN sudo sh -c '(echo "#!/usr/bin/env sh" && curl -L https://github.com/lihaoyi/Ammonite/releases/download/2.0.4/2.13-2.0.4) > /usr/local/bin/amm && chmod +x /usr/local/bin/amm'

RUN brew install scala coursier/formulas/coursier sbt scalaenv

RUN sudo env "PATH=$PATH" coursier bootstrap org.scalameta:scalafmt-cli_2.12:2.4.2 \
  -r sonatype:snapshots \
  -o /usr/local/bin/scalafmt --standalone --main org.scalafmt.cli.Cli

RUN scalaenv install scala-2.9.3 && scalaenv global scala-2.9.3
```

You will notice that all the `brew install` commands are on the same line. We recommend grouping similar commands together to minimize the number of [Docker layers](https://docs.docker.com/develop/develop-images/dockerfile_best-practices/#minimize-the-number-of-layers).

> Additionally, your [.gitpod.yml](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-gitpod-file/) file should look like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, your [.gitpod.yml](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-gitpod-file/) file should still look like this:
```

```YAML
image:
  file: .gitpod.Dockerfile
```

> What this really does is says, that the docker image is built from the [.gitpod.Dockerfile](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-docker/) that we created.

Reviewer: I think we already explained this above.

```suggestion
```

## VSCode Extensions

### Scala Syntax (official)

![Scala Syntax demo](../images/scala-syntax.png)

Scala Syntax adds basic syntax highlighting for Scala and `sbt` files. To get it, add the following to your [.gitpod.yml](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-gitpod-file/) file:

```YAML
vscode:
  extensions:
    - scala-lang.scala@0.3.9:kklqw+c/dNRmtTU8B5repw==
```

### Metals

![An example of the metals in Gitpod](../images/metals-demo.png)

Metals adds helpful Scala features to Gitpod, for example, advanced autocompletion and debugging support just to name a few. Although to use it you must also use the previously mentioned Scala Syntax you should do the following

If you already added Scala Syntax put the following on the following line

```YAML
    - scalameta.metals@1.7.8:oixMSF1r3cXQPfOQ34+sTA==
```

Otherwise, add the following to your [.gitpod.yml](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/config-gitpod-file/)

```YAML
vscode:
  extensions:
    - scala-lang.scala@0.3.9:kklqw+c/dNRmtTU8B5repw==
    - scalameta.metals@1.7.8:oixMSF1r3cXQPfOQ34+sTA==
```

Either way, the end result should look like the snippet above.

> Boom! You're done! (Just a reminder, don't forget to commit the changes.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Boom! You're done! (Just a reminder, don't forget to push the changes.)
```

## Debugging Scala code

> To debug Scala code in Gitpod you must use the metals extension which we just went over. Here is an example of Scala Debugging in action:

Reviewer: "must" sounds a bit too strong here (also, I'm not 100% sure that there doesn't exist any other way in the world to debug Scala code in Gitpod).

```suggestion
To debug Scala code in Gitpod you should use the Metals extension which we just went over. Here is an example of Scala Debugging in action:
```

![Example of debugging Scala in Gitpod](../images/scala-debug.gif)

> In general when debugging Scala code, go to the main method, and click the Debug button over it! And boom you're debugging

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general when debugging Scala code, go to the main method, and click the Debug button over it! And boom you're debugging.
```

## Try it!

> To see a minimal example repository with a Gitpod configuration that installs all the tools we've covered, see [gitpod-io/Gitpod-Scala](https://github.com/gitpod-io/Gitpod-Scala). You can also try it in your browser:

Reviewer: Sorry, my earlier suggestion had too many words:

```suggestion
To see a minimal repository with a Gitpod configuration that installs all the tools we've covered, see [gitpod-io/Gitpod-Scala](https://github.com/gitpod-io/Gitpod-Scala). You can try it in your browser:
```

[![Open in Gitpod](https://gitpod.io/button/open-in-gitpod.svg)](https://gitpod.io/#https://github.com/gitpod-io/Gitpod-Scala)

## Need help?

> If you are having trouble and need help please [file an issue on GitHub](https://github.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/issues/new/choose), or, find us in the [Gitpod community](https://community.gitpod.io/)

Reviewer: Community is preferred for general help:

```suggestion
If you are having trouble and need help please find us in the [Gitpod community](https://community.gitpod.io/), or, [file an issue on GitHub](https://github.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/issues/new/choose).
```

## Feedback

> We love feedback and want to continue to improve on all of our guides and documentation. Whether you found a grammar mistake, or we left out your favorite Scala tool, or you just have general feedback on the guide, please [file an issue on GitHub](https://github.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/issues/new/choose), or, find us in the [Gitpod community](https://community.gitpod.io/)!

Reviewer: Gitpod issues are not the right place for website bugs. 😄 

```suggestion
We love feedback and want to continuously improve all of our guides and documentation. If you found a grammar mistake, or we left out your favorite Scala tool, or you just have general feedback on the guide, please feel free to [edit this guide](https://github.com/gitpod-io/website/blob/master/src/docs/languages/scala.md) or to [file a website issue on GitHub](https://github.com/gitpod-io/website/issues/new/choose).
```

> We love feedback and want to continuously improve all of our guides and documentation. If you found a grammar mistake, or we left out your favorite Scala tool, or you just have general feedback on the guide, please feel free to [edit this guide](https://github.com/gitpod-io/website/blob/master/src/docs/languages/scala.md) or to [file a website issue on GitHub](https://github.com/gitpod-io/website/issues/new/choose).

Reviewer: The GitHub link is broken, because it ends with `.md`.

To fix it, I think you'll have to improve the code in:

https://github.com/gitpod-io/website/blob/d889ceaed872d4b6709aee2373c9ad6552c55141/plugins/gatsby-remark-gitpod/index.js#L6-L8

E.g. adding the condition `!node.url.startsWith('http') &&` should suffice. (Or remove this entire file, I think it's no longer needed actually.)

Author: Done!
